JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: We should hammer
this out, and get it done.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Changing his tune.
The president calls
on Republicans not to
leave Washington until
a health care plan
is approved.
We talk with two senators,
Roberts of Kansas and Wicker
of Mississippi, about where the
effort to repeal
Obamacare stands.
Then: New revelations of
an undisclosed meeting
between President Trump
and Russia's President
Putin at the G20 summit bring
the two leaders' relationship
back into the spotlight.
Plus: With food stamps on the
president's chopping block,
we travel south to see what
these changes could mean for
a state that overwhelmingly
supported him in the election.
JAMES JACKSON, Receives SNAP
Assistance: Give me a chance to
get off the very program that
you're trying to cut.
I want to get off.
But if you take away my ability
to get off, what can I do?
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senate
Republicans are trying
again to see if there
is a way forward on
health care reform.
Their latest bill to replace
Obamacare collapsed yesterday,
but party leaders say it may not
be dead yet, after a repeal-only
option also ran into opposition.
President Trump called the
caucus to the White House today.
He said he is now ready
to act, and insisted that
inaction is not an option.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: Frankly, I don't
think we should leave town
unless we have a health
insurance plan, unless
we can give our people
great health care,
because we're close.
We're very close.
Any senator who votes against
starting debate is really
telling America that you're fine
with Obamacare.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Afterward,
Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell said he still aims
to hold a vote next week,
but it's not clear on what.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: I think we all agree
it's better to both repeal
and replace.
But we could have
a vote on either.
And if we end up voting on
repeal only, it will be fully
amendable on the Senate floor.
And if it were to pass without
any amendment at all, there's
a two-year delay before it
kicks in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will be
talking to two Republican
senators about the
state of play on health
care reform after
the news summary.
Separately, there's word
that President Trump is
ending a CIA program to
arm and train moderate
rebels in Syria.
The goal was to fight the regime
of President Bashar al-Assad,
but it had only limited effects
after Russia intervened
to aid Assad.
The Washington Post reports
the president made the decision
nearly a month ago, before
he met with Russian's President
Putin at the G20 summit.
Afterward, the U.S. and
Russia announced a limited
cease-fire in Syria.
The Post account says that
the aid decision is part of a
strategy to negotiate more such
deals.
Iran today stepped up its
defiant response to the latest
round of U.S. sanctions.
They target 18 individuals and
companies assisting the Iranian
ballistic missile program.
In Tehran, President Hassan
Rouhani charged that the U.S.
measures are inconsistent with
the 2016 nuclear deal.
And he warned of
reciprocal acts.
HASSAN ROUHANI, Iranian
President (through
translator): If Americans
pass new sanctions
in any form, or under
any pretext in Congress
or elsewhere, the great
nation of Iran will
have an appropriate answer.
We won't ignore violations
by the United States, and
will stand up to them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also, the head
of the hard-line Revolutionary
Guards warned that the U.S.
had better pull its military
forces back at least 1,000
kilometers, or 600 miles, from
Iran.
The U.S. Supreme Court has
issued a split ruling on
enforcing the president's travel
ban.
The court today allowed the
administration to strictly
enforce a ban on refugees while
an appeal moves
through lower courts.
But the justices expanded the
list of people from six mostly
Muslim nations who are allowed
to visit the U.S.
Back in this country, the
Justice Department is restoring
authority to local police to
seize money and property
on suspicion they come
from criminal activity.
The assets can be taken
even without criminal
charges being brought.
The Obama administration
had curbed the practice,
but Attorney General
Jeff Sessions today eased
the restrictions.
On Wall Street, tech and health
care stocks fueled a day of
record highs across the board.
The Dow Jones industrial
average gained 66 points
to close at 21640.
The Nasdaq rose 40, and
the S&P 500 added 13.
And Salem, Massachusetts,
today marked 325 years since
five women were hanged in the
infamous witch trials.
They were among 19 people
condemned and hanged for
witchcraft in Salem in 1692.
A descendant of one of them
said it brings justice to the
fact that they were wrongly
accused.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
two Republican senators on
their party's efforts to repeal
Obamacare; the president's
response to revelations
of his second conversation
with Vladimir Putin;
two state views on the
controversial voter fraud
commission; and much more.
Now we return to the battle
over health care and President
Trump's meeting with Senate
Republicans at the White House.
We hear from two people
who were in the room, first
Senator Pat Roberts of Kansas.
He is a member of the
Health, Education, Labor
and Pensions Committee.
I spoke with him a short time
ago and started by asking what
the president changed today
in his pitch to senators.
SEN.
PAT ROBERTS (R), Kansas: We
had a meeting that I thought
was highly productive.
I thought the president made
a very good case that if you
simply have a repeal and, in two
years, you're going to see
further deterioration, if that's
the right word, for Obamacare.
In Kansas, our premiums
continue to soar.
We're up now $3,000.
This is a little like being in
the back seat of a convertible
with Thelma and Louise and
we're headed toward the canyon.
We're about at the edge.
So, we have got to do something.
Number one, we have
to get out of the car.
Number two, we have got
to get into a new car.
And that's what the
president was talking about.
We had the entire
Republican Conference.
I think he did a good message.
There was a good -- I
think he did a good job.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But what
has changed with your
Republican colleagues?
Because, yesterday,
there weren't going to be
enough votes to do this.
Today, there are?
Is that simply because of an
argument the president made?
SEN.
PAT ROBERTS: Well, the first
thing is, Judy, is that we have
got to get over this business
of denying the leadership of
our party, Mitch McConnell,
at least a motion to proceed.
I think the American people
want us to debate it.
I think the American
people want us to vote
on several different
items that people would
be presenting.
This is a vote-a-rama anyway.
You're probably going
to have 150 votes,.
But we need a debate
and we need to vote.
Now, this business of
stopping the motion to
proceed, that has to quit.
And that was one of the
main messages that the
president indicated,
to give Mitch McConnell
the -- obviously, the number
of votes he needed to go ahead
with this kind of an exercise.
I think the president
really listened.
We had at least 35 people,
maybe 40, make suggestions
with regards to the bill.
There was a lot of consensus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
SEN.
PAT ROBERTS: And the other thing
-- and I think he mentioned
this is much larger than
health care -- is whether or not
Republicans can actually govern.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're
saying -- let me just clarify.
So, you're saying whether
Republicans can get together
as a group is more important
than health care legislation?
SEN.
PAT ROBERTS: No, it's
not more important.
It's another consideration,
that, if we can't do this, maybe
you can't do tax reform or,
for that matter, anything
else on the table.
Both are very important.
Obviously, you have to
get health care right.
That was the whole
intent of the meeting.
He listened very carefully.
He stated his position
very forcefully.
And I think it was
a good meeting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me
ask you about the fact that the
criticisms of this legislation
are the same today as
they were yesterday.
And I'm just looking
at the state of Kansas.
Your hospital association had
-- had looked at the changes
you had proposed directing
more money to the hospitals.
And they said, that's great,
but they said, even with that,
it doesn't make up for the
deep cuts to Medicaid and
other problems with the bill.
What would you say today to
your hospital association?
SEN.
PAT ROBERTS: Well, as a matter
of fact, I'm meeting with them
just as I get through talking
with you.
I will point out to
them that Obamacare will
continue to deteriorate.
We have already lost
one insurance company;
42,000 Kansans don't
have insurance anymore.
And if we lose our remaining
insurer, we're really
going to be in trouble.
So, it isn't so much what we
would like to have as what
is happening to Obamacare.
Now, working with the
Kansas Hospital Association,
I think there are going
to be some new ideas
presented in whatever
bill that comes up with
- - or we come up with.
And the president was
doing a lot of listening.
The White House was doing a lot
of listening, Tom Price, Seema
Verma, all the people within
the administration, that
they're going to come
up with something new.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, I also
was reading that 70 percent
of all Medicaid enrollees
in the state of
Kansas are children.
SEN.
PAT ROBERTS: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Three hundred
thousand Kansas children.
What's going to happen to them?
SEN.
PAT ROBERTS: Well, they're
going to be covered.
We are increasing
Medicaid every year.
There may be some more
wrap-around amendments or
different opportunities
for Medicaid for
us.
And we were a
non-Medicaid state.
I think one of the reasons the
Kansas Hospital Association
was so upset with this is that,
twice, they really supported
efforts on Medicaid funding, and
not to make it a non-Medicaid
expansion state.
But that ship has sailed.
The Kansas state legislature
didn't approve that, and
the governor vetoed it.
And they were not able
to override the veto.
We have to work
with what we have.
They're going to be in my
office in about 30 minutes, and
we are going to go over that
and what the president said.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we look
forward to hearing about
the outcome of that meeting.
Senator Pat Roberts of
Kansas, thank you very much.
SEN.
PAT ROBERTS: My privilege.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Senator
Roger Wicker of Mississippi was
also at the White House today.
I started by asking him if the
president's engagement adds
more pressure on Republicans.
SEN.
ROGER WICKER (R), Mississippi:
Well, I guess there is some
pressure on some of the people
who are sort of still
doubtful about this.
I don't feel the pressure,
because I have been a yes
vote for quite some time.
But let me tell you,
there are two schools of
thought on moving forward.
The majority leader, Senator
McConnell, would like to get to
a vote on the motion to proceed
and see where people are.
And, if we win, great,
we proceed to the bill.
If not, at least people have
voted, and we know what the
target is, if we lose by two
or three votes.
The president, on the other
hand, really thinks that, over
the next few days, we can get 50
votes to yes.
And he was all about today
getting into the details of
what's keeping various members
from being able to say 100
percent that they can support
this legislation and deciding
what levers to pull to
get the bill to a place
where 50 of us can say yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the reason
I'm asking about pressure is
because, a couple of weeks
ago, when Senator Dean Heller of
Nevada indicated he was having
problems with the legislation,
there was a political action
group supporting the president
that ran ads against him.
Is that the kind of...
(CROSSTALK)
SEN.
ROGER WICKER: And I think that
was generally considered to be
bad form and counterproductive
among people in the
Republican Conference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let
me ask you a little bit
about the substance of this.
As you know, a lot of discussion
about what this bill would
mean for coverage, including
Medicaid.
The vice president of your home
state -- a Mississippi state
hospital association quoted
this week as saying they
are opposed to anything
that increases the
number of uninsured in
Mississippi.
SEN.
ROGER WICKER: Well, for
one thing, I don't think
it would increase the
number of uninsured.
These changes are based on
projections of people that will
be covered, if the estimates
are correct.
So, I would just challenge that.
But let me also say -- and I
don't mean to be critical, or
I don't mean this to be taken
wrong -- but there's never
been a provider who came to us
and said, we need you to slow
the growth rate of these
entitlement programs.
I mean, that's just
not something that
they're going to say.
But the fact is we can
make health care better
for Mississippians, and
we can make coverage
better for the average American,
while, at the same time,
saving a system that is not
sustainable for
future generations.
And we can do that.
And, at the end of the day,
I think people in the health
care business, in the hospital
business in future years
will say, you have saved
the system and good for you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, when
I read that there are
almost half-a-million
children in Mississippi
who depend on Medicaid, are
you saying they don't have
anything to worry about?
SEN.
ROGER WICKER: I think -- well,
for one thing, we are not
a Medicaid expansion state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
SEN.
ROGER WICKER: Our state
didn't choose to do that.
And so it's completely
inaccurate to say that
these 500,000 children
are going to lose their
coverage.
They're not.
As a matter of fact, there will
be a tradition - - I mean, there
will be a transition -- I'm
sorry -- and states that
expanded Medicaid will have a
seven-year period and there will
be an extra incentive for those
states who chose not to do that.
But those 500,000 children that
you talk about are not going to
have their coverage threatened.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Senator Roger Wicker joining us
from the Capitol, we thank you.
SEN.
ROGER WICKER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a quick
postscript: We don't know yet
what the latest revisions to
the Senate bill to repeal and
replace the Affordable Care
Act will include, but, for
the record, the Congressional
Budget Office already estimated
what would happen with the
first version of the bill.
It concluded there would be 15
million fewer Medicaid enrollees
in a decade than projected
under current law.
It also said that, over the
long haul, states would likely
have to either spend more money,
cut payments, eliminate
services or limit who's
eligible for Medicaid.
It is not clear how many
children would be affected.
On July the 7th, President
Trump sat down for
a highly anticipated
meeting with Russia's
President Vladimir Putin at the
G20 summit in Hamburg, Germany.
But, last night, it was
disclosed that there
was a second lengthy
conversation later that
day between the two leaders,
one that the White House had
not spoken of at the time.
Nick Schifrin reports.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It was a
three-hour dinner party for the
world's most powerful people,
20 leaders, and their spouses.
On the menu, turbot fish
fillet, Friesian beef
cheeks, and chitchat.
President Trump worked the
room, and then took his seat.
Diagonally across
the table, first lady
Melania Trump and Russian
President Vladimir Putin.
The two talked to each
other with the help
of Putin's translator.
And as a dessert of raspberries
and cheese was served, Mr.
Trump walked over to Putin.
White House spokeswoman Sarah
Sanders today called their
talk brief and informal.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, Deputy
White House Press Secretary:
To try to create that there
was some sort of private
conversation in a room
with 40-plus people
seems a little bit
ridiculous.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Nick Burns is
a former U.S. ambassador to
NATO and veteran diplomat who
participated in dozens
of U.S.-Russia meetings.
NICHOLAS BURNS, Former U.S.
Undersecretary of State for
Political Affairs: This is not
a bad thing.
Vladimir Putin and Donald
Trump are the two most
powerful people in the world.
They barely know each other.
They'd only met once before
this G20 dinner, and it's really
important that they get to
know each other and develop
some capacity to have an
effective relationship.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Last night, Trump
blasted the media coverage,
tweeting: "Fake news story
of secret dinner
with Putin is sick."
The pro-Kremlin Russian
lawmaker Alexei Pushkov
used the exact same
language, describing reports
about a -- quote --
"secret dinner" as sick.
And, today, German Chancellor
Angela Merkel's spokesman called
these dinner conversations
normal.
STEFFEN SEIBERT, German
Government Spokesman
(through translator):
It is the fundamental
point of the G20 meeting
that, alongside working
meetings, there is room
and opportunity for
multiple informal contacts.
And that is certainly the
point of such a dinner.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But what
is unusual is that,
since there were no other
U.S. officials present,
and the translator was Putin's,
the U.S. officials who work on
Russia have no official notes.
NICHOLAS BURNS: The people down
the line cannot do their job if
they don't have an exact sense
of what our president said,
what the other guy said, and
how they can then pursue these
issues with the
Russian government.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The dinner talk
came on the same day as Trump
and Putin's only official
meeting.
That talk lasted
more than two hours.
The next day, having spoken
with Trump at least twice,
Putin praised Trump personally.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
As for personal relations, I
think that they have
been established.
I don't know how this will
sound, but I will say it how I
see it: The Trump on television
is very different
from the real person.
He's very direct.
He perceives his conversation
partner very well.
He's a fairly quick thinker.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It is that
kind of praise that many
here in Washington find
strange and concerning.
Multiple administration
officials tell the "NewsHour"
they have still not received a
report from the official
Trump-Putin meeting, let
alone the dinner conversation.
That is not business as usual.
NICHOLAS BURNS: President Trump
has put together, I think, the
weakest policy on Russia in 70
years.
It's why you have seen
so many people concerned
by this one conversation.
What did President Trump
say to President Putin?
People in our government need
to know the answers to those
questions, and we as citizens
need those answers as well.
NICK SCHIFRIN: A dinnertime
conversation might not
be out of the ordinary,
except the president's
2016 campaign is under
investigation for possibly
colluding with Russia.
And the man he was talking to
is accused by U.S. intelligence
of ordering the covert effort
to help Trump get elected.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Nick Schifrin in Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Late today, the
Senate Judiciary Committee said
that Donald Trump Jr. and former
Trump campaign manager Paul
Manafort will testify next
Wednesday about their meeting
with a Russian
lawyer last summer.
The president's son-in-law,
Jared Kushner, goes before the
Senate Intelligence Committee
on Monday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the
"NewsHour": what proposed
cuts to food stamps could
mean for Trump voters;
how Tesla's new cheaper
electric car could shape the
industry's future; and "Devil's
Bargain," a new book about White
House strategist Steve Bannon.
But first: President
Trump continues to repeat
the unsubstantiated
claim that millions of
illegal votes were cast
in the 2016 election.
The commission he set
up to look into this has
sparked its own controversy.
William Brangham reports.
DONALD TRUMP, President of
the United States: Every time
voter fraud occurs, it cancels
out the vote of a lawful citizen
and undermines democracy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The first
meeting of the Commission on
Election Integrity convened
with a presidential
defense of its mission.
DONALD TRUMP: Throughout the
campaign, and even after,
people would come up to me and
express their concerns
about voter inconsistencies
and irregularities
which they saw, in some
cases having to do with
very large numbers of
people in certain states.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So far, those
allegations remain unproven,
but the commission is pressing
ahead.
Last month, it sent letters to
every state, asking for voter
information, including names,
birthdays and partial
Social Security numbers.
Seventeen states, governed
by Republicans and Democrats,
as well as the District of
Columbia, refused to comply.
Many others said they
will provide only limited
information that's already
publicly available.
Today, the president
criticized those states
who've refused to go along.
DONALD TRUMP: One has to wonder
what they're worried about.
And I ask the vice president
and I ask the commission,
what are they worried about?
There's something.
There always is.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Just after
the election, when Hillary
Clinton won the popular vote
by 2.8 million votes, Mr. Trump
tweeted, again, with no evidence
whatsoever, that the vote
count was skewed -- quote --
"I won the popular vote if you
deduct the millions of people
who voted illegally."
The commission co-chair,
Kansas Secretary of State Kris
Kobach, who is a Republican,
says the country deserves
a hard, dispassionate
look at the issue.
KRIS KOBACH (R), Kansas
Secretary of State: For a long
time, there has been lingering
doubt among many Americans
about integrity and
fairness of elections.
And it's not a new issue at all.
If you look at polling
data, it goes back decades.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The panel is
chaired by Vice President Pence,
and in addition to Kobach,
members include current and
former secretaries of state from
Indiana, New Hampshire, Maine
and Ohio, among others.
But critics of the commission
warn that stoking fears of
alleged fraud will be used later
to justify a crackdown
on voting rights.
Rick Hasen is a law professor
at the University of California,
Irvine, and an election law
expert.
RICK HASEN, University
of California, Irvine:
I'm concerned that it's
going to be something
that is just going to try
to support the president's
agenda, claiming that
there's a lot of voter
fraud, and use that to make
it harder for people to be
able to register to vote.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Already, the
commission is facing at least
seven lawsuits questioning
its transparency, conduct
and even its existence.
We turn now to two
officials who actually run
elections in their states.
Matthew Dunlap is the
secretary of state for Maine.
He is a Democrat, and
he's also a member of the
president's commission.
And he was at today's meeting.
We're also joined
by Michele Reagan.
She is a Republican and she is
Arizona's secretary of state.
Welcome to you both.
MATTHEW DUNLAP (D),
Maine Secretary of State:
Thank you for having us.
MICHELE REAGAN (R),
Arizona Secretary of State:
Thank you for having us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Matthew, I would love
to start with you first.
What is your general hope that
this commission - - what do
you hope it will accomplish?
MATTHEW DUNLAP: Well, my general
hope is that actually we do
something to bolster voter
confidence in how we conduct
elections in this country.
I think we have an awful
lot to be proud of.
No one is questioning the
legitimacy of the outcome
of the 2016 election.
There are some lingering
questions about how
elections have been
conducted, who was able
to vote legally or not.
And I think, and based on my
experience in the state of
Maine, I think we can very, very
proud of what our local election
officials have done to make
sure that their neighbors
get to exercise their democratic
right of self-governance.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Michele
Reagan, I know you are
a supporter broadly
of this commission
and its aims.
As you know, the commission
was set up in part because of
the president's concern that
there had been some voter
fraud in the past election.
I'm curious.
You were running the election
in Arizona back in 2016.
Did you have any instances
of fraud in your state?
MICHELE REAGAN: Well, I can't
speak, obviously, for other
states, but I know, in Arizona,
we have a number of measures
that we use to prevent fraud.
And that's not to say
fraud never happens.
Certainly, when we hear
allegations of that, we
take it very seriously.
But it's important to
note Arizona has some
laws on the books that
keep it very safe from
fraud, massive fraud.
One is the showing proof of
I.D. at the polling places.
Another is proof of citizenship
when registering to vote.
A lot of states don't
have these laws.
And so, speaking from Arizona's
point of view, coupled with the
fact that we also participate,
already, in interstate
cross-check systems,
for instances, of
double voting or double
registration, we're pretty
confident in Arizona that we
run a really good election.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Matthew
Dunlap, as I mentioned
in the report prior to
this, the commission
asked all the states for some
types of voter information.
And there was a lot of concern.
Many states pushed back.
I understand Maine didn't
share its information.
Explain to me, what
is the concern?
What are you worried about?
MATTHEW DUNLAP: Well, we're not
really worried about anything.
We just follow the law.
The request that came from the
commission, which, as commission
members, we did not review
the full text of the
letter that went out.
We did agree that the
information that should
be requested should be
requested, not demanded,
and it should only be that
information that would
be publicly available
to anyone legally
entitled to obtain it under
those particular state laws.
When we got the request, the
letter said that be advised that
any information that you provide
will be made publicly available
for anyone to inspect.
Maine election law specifies
that anyone who is qualified
to access the voter file must
keep it confidential.
And that is directory language.
Making the list available is
discretionary under the law.
So, with that direction, it was
a mathematical equation for us.
We simply could not provide
it under those circumstances.
And so we didn't.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Michele
Reagan, do you have
concerns about this
database being compiled
here in Washington, D.C.?
MICHELE REAGAN: Well,
absolutely we have concerns.
And, again, in Arizona, we
just looked to the statutes
and the law to tell us exactly
what we were going to
have to do or not do.
And the law is pretty clear
that, again, just like in Maine,
you can't take the information
via a public records
request with the intent of
sharing it or posting it
publicly or disseminate,
you know, giving it out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Matthew
Dunlap, what about this larger
concern that has been raised by
some people that this commission
and its mission is going to be
used to justify further national
crackdown on voting rights?
What do you make of that?
MATTHEW DUNLAP: That's one of
my favorite questions to get
out of all of this, is that
somehow we're trying to
undo the electoral process.
My position is, is that you have
these lingering questions that
have been around for a while
now about illegal
activity around elections.
Sunshine is the
greatest disinfectant.
I have full confidence
that everything that's
been claimed will probably
be largely debunked.
And what we will find
will probably be the
product of mistakes and
errors and unintended
actions that were never
meant to become felonies.
So I think, you know, with that
understanding, I think we're
going to find that we have a
really pretty good system
that's very, very decentralized,
which actually adds to its
level of security against some
of the allegations that we have
heard about, like the Russian
Federation getting involved
in hacking our elections.
I think the systems that we
have in place, which are run
by local election officials,
actually will be found to
work very, very well, and that
American voters should feel
pretty good about the systems
that help us elect our
leadership and decide issues.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Michele Reagan, you heard
Matthew here say that he
believes the commission
will largely debunk
many of these claims.
But just today, the co-chairman
of the commission, Kris Kobach,
said on MSNBC that he says, we
may never know whether
or not Hillary Clinton in
fact won the popular vote.
That is an implication that is
very likely the potential that
three million illegal votes
were cast.
Is the head of the commission
is making that kind of a
statement, does that concern you
at all about the thrust
of this commission?
MICHELE REAGAN: What really
concerns me is the good work
that the commission could be
doing.
And I hope -- and I have
high hopes that they
will look forward to
some of these suggestions
that states are making.
I would hope that this
commission takes what
states are doing and
determines what is working
best, so they can share
it with other states.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Michele Reagan, Matthew Dunlap,
thank you both very much.
MATTHEW DUNLAP: Thank
you for having us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressional
Republicans yesterday unveiled
a budget that would dramatically
curb spending on a
host of social welfare
programs, including the
federal government's
Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program, or SNAP,
better known as food stamps.
The president's budget released
earlier this year also included
deep cuts to the program.
To see how those proposals
might play out, "NewsHour"
special correspondent Cat Wise
recently traveled to
Arkansas, a state that voted
heavily for Mr. Trump.
This report is part of Chasing
the Dream, our ongoing series
on poverty and opportunity
in America.
CAT WISE: In the small
town of Thornton, Arkansas,
Joannie Cayce fires up
her truck twice a month,
and drives to a Wal-Mart about
30 miles away to stock up on
fruits, vegetables, meat, milk
and other products
donated by the company.
When she returns to the local
food pantry her family has
run since the 1950s, some 200
residents are waiting, and
a desperate rush begins.
WOMAN: We get paid every two
weeks, and, by the end of the
week, it's like the cupboards
are bare, and we're
ramen noodling, you know?
WOMAN: I got two kids at
the house and stuff that's
hungry that I have to feed.
CAT WISE: Ms. Cayce, as she's
known here, says the number
of people she serves each
month has nearly doubled in
the past year-and-a-half,
from 350 to 650, even
as the state's economy
has improved.
JOANNIE CAYCE, Cayce Charities:
We see no employment, no
grocery stores, no craft stores.
Mostly, the families
are generationally poor,
and they can't move.
They don't have the money to
move or anywhere to go to move.
CAT WISE: The day we
visited, Brittney Williams
came to Ms. Cayce's with
her two young daughters.
At mid-month, she's already
run out of the $231 a month
she receives in food stamps,
or SNAP, the federal
government's Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance
Program for the poor.
BRITTNEY WILLIAMS, Receives
SNAP Assistance: I'm out of
food stamps within two weeks.
And that's another two weeks
week-and-a-half, two weeks,
that I'm sitting here, well, how
am I going to feed my kids?
You know, what am
I going to do next?
Am I going to have to beg people
for food, or go to Ms. Cayce,
or what if Ms. Cayce don't
come back to me in
time, and I run out?
CAT WISE: Brittney's husband,
Daryl, works full-time as a
security guard at the local
sawmill, making $11 an hour.
He says the family's bills
have been piling up for months,
and that they're now facing
eviction.
DARYL WILLIAMS, Receives
SNAP Assistance: I have got
a truck payment outside.
I have got all the
utilities in here.
After buying pull-ups and wipes
for them included, I have got
maybe $50 to $100 left a month,
and that's got to go in for
gas, so I can get back and
forth to work for the next two
weeks.
CAT WISE: To qualify for
food stamps, a family
of four in Arkansas must
make less than $32,000
a year.
Last year, 14 percent of the
state's population was on
SNAP, or about 426,000 people.
That percentage mirrors
the national picture.
In 2016, 44 million
Americans were on SNAP,
receiving an average
benefit of $126 per person
per month, or
about $1.40 a meal.
For years, the program has
been in the crosshairs of
conservative lawmakers,
who say the government
simply can't sustain a federal
program that last year cost $71
billion, up from $33 billion
in 2007, before the recession.
REP.
BRUCE WESTERMAN (R), Arkansas:
Instead of lifting people
out of poverty, many of our
welfare programs are actually
trapping people in poverty.
CAT WISE: Bruce Westerman is the
Republican U.S. representative
of the 4th District in
Arkansas, which
includes Thornton.
REP.
BRUCE WESTERMAN: We have
got to do something to get
the debt under control.
It's either do it the easy way
now, which may not seem easy
to some, or have the whole
thing come crashing down and
not be able to provide SNAP,
or Medicare and Medicaid or
anything to anyone because
we're in a financial crisis.
CAT WISE: Mick Mulvaney is
the Trump administration's
director of the Office
of Management and Budget.
MICK MULVANEY, White House
Budget Director: We're no longer
going to measure compassion
by the number of programs or
the number of people on those
programs, but by the number
of people we help get
off of those programs.
CAT WISE: In May, the
White House presented its
budget, which aimed to
slash federal spending
by $3.6 trillion
over the next decade.
If Congress were to pass that
budget, SNAP would lose $193
billion, around a quarter
of its funding.
The plan calls for tightening
standards on who qualifies
for the program, and, for the
first time, the budget shifts
a large chunk of the cost to
states, starting with 10 percent
in 2020 and rising to
25 percent in 2023.
For Arkansas, that would
mean $144 million added to
its state budget each year.
KATHY WEBB (D), Former
Arkansas State Representative:
I don't see where we
would make up that $144
million.
CAT WISE: You don't think
the state can make that up?
KATHY WEBB: I don't think
the state can make that up.
CAT WISE: Kathy Webb is a former
state Democratic representative
who now runs the Arkansas Hunger
Relief Alliance, a nonprofit
organization connecting and
advocating for the state's
food banks.
She says private charities
could not fill the gap.
KATHY WEBB: We cannot
make up the difference.
And all of the charitable food
network put together is about
a 20th of what the federal
safety net is.
CAT WISE: Webb also worries
about the effect a SNAP cut
would have on grocery stores in
poor communities.
RANDY LINDSEY, Business Owner:
It takes everything to make it.
There is no slack.
CAT WISE: Randy Lindsey and his
wife, Janice, run the Bottom
Dollar Store in Bearden, near
Thornton.
It's one of the few stores in
the area selling fresh produce
and meat, as well as household
items, flowers and more.
Lindsey, a Trump supporter,
says, in a tough economy,
every little bit helps.
RANDY LINDSEY: If I
lost 25 percent of SNAP,
for me, it would mean
cutting 10 to 15 hours
a week, or roughly 40
hours a month off payroll.
CAT WISE: So your employees
would be impacted?
RANDY LINDSEY: Yes.
It would impact employees.
That's a pretty
good chunk to lose.
There's not much gravy
in this operation.
We make less money, then
something has to be cut.
CAT WISE: Conservatives often
point out that SNAP expanded
considerably under Presidents
George W. Bush and Barack
Obama, and they are correct.
The rise was particularly
acute during the recession of
2008, when millions lost work
and joined SNAP's rolls.
Benefits were also increased as
part of the Stimulus Act, the
2009 law that pumped billions
in federal spending into
communities across the country.
Yet, since late 2012, both
spending and the number of
people on SNAP have fallen, and
the nonpartisan Congressional
Budget Office estimates that,
if no changes were made, the
share of the population
on SNAP would return to
pre-recession levels by 2027.
Still, SNAP remains historically
high, as more working families
like the Williams, and
seniors like 63-year-old
James Jackson earn less, thus
qualifying for the benefit.
JAMES JACKSON, Receives
SNAP Assistance: Anybody,
anyone, at any time can
be affected by poverty.
CAT WISE: Nearly 25 percent
of all seniors in Arkansas
face the threat of hunger.
That leads the nation,
according to a recent report.
Jackson, a trained chef and
a professional painter, has
struggled to find work since
his truck broke down.
He now lives in subsidized
housing in Little Rock
and receives $172 a
month in food stamps.
He voted for President
Trump, but urges him
not to make these cuts.
JAMES JACKSON: Give me a chance
to get off the very program
that you're trying to cut.
I want to get off.
But if you take away my ability
to get off, what can I do?
CAT WISE: In the long
run, it's more economic
opportunities, rather than
government assistance,
that Congressman Westerman
says will best help the
people of his state.
REP.
BRUCE WESTERMAN: It's a shame
that we have to have a program
that large in this country.
We need to provide more
opportunities for people that
are good-paying jobs, and not
just jobs, but careers
where they can build
homes and communities.
CAT WISE: Back in
Thornton, after the rush
has passed, Joannie Cayce
listens to the desperate
plea of a woman who
couldn't get there today.
WOMAN: I am a
grandmother of four.
I live alone.
Please, please, help me.
JOANNIE CAYCE: It's the people
that don't come in, it's the
people that live 30 miles
outside of this little food
bank and that I don't know
about or that I can't reach,
it's those people that keep me
awake at night, those children
that I know that are out of
school that aren't getting
a breakfast and lunch.
CAT WISE: Some hungry families
may not be able to get to
her, but Ms. Cayce spends the
rest of her day making
home deliveries.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Cat Wise in Thornton, Arkansas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now:
Electric cars, are they
the ride of the future?
Their potential to revolutionize
the road is once again
grabbing headlines, as some
companies ramp up
production plans.
William Brangham breaks down
the realities of the technology
and the market for electric
vehicles.
He recorded this earlier for our
weekly segment on the Leading
Edge of science and technology.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The knock on
electric cars has always been
that they're a pricey, niche
product that only a
handful of people would
want or could afford.
But that reputation is
starting to crumble, and fast.
The electric car maker Tesla,
which already has a bigger
market value than General Motors
and Ford, will soon
be delivering its
mid-priced Model 3 car.
Volvo just announced that,
in two years, all of its cars
will be hybrids or electric.
And some major U.S.
manufacturers have
proven electric vehicles
available right now.
So, are electric vehicles
ready to go mainstream?
NPR's Sonari Glinton has
been covering the story.
And he joins me now.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
SONARI GLINTON, NPR:
It's good to be here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, electric
car advocates have been saying
for decades that these cars
are the future.
Why has it taken them this long
to get to where they are today?
SONARI GLINTON: I would say low
gas prices, the pickup truck,
and America's sort of dependency
on the status quo.
When you look at an electric
car, if you drive one -- I used
to have a plug-in hybrid -- and
I got to a point where I
never went to the gas station,
and I never thought...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's
got to be a great feeling.
SONARI GLINTON: Yes, and
I never -- yes, exactly.
And I -- when I switched --
I'm one of the few people to
switch, you know, from electric
to a gas-powered car.
When I went to a gas-powered
car, it's a two-seater
convertible, so like
that's the reason I did
that.
But I cannot imagine getting
-- I can't imagine not
having that convenience.
You always start the
day with a full tank.
It's a simpler drivetrain,
so it's easier to fix.
It has fewer problems.
It's quiet like a luxury car.
The problem is, is that
the car companies, right,
are building trucks that...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
That the market wants.
SONARI GLINTON:
Desperately wants.
And people are buying
SUVs way more now than
they're buying cars.
The tipping point was
reached a few years ago.
And now we're at about 60
-- depending on what month,
about 60/40 SUVs to cars.
And that's partially because
we're all realizing, like,
I want to sit up higher.
I want to...
(CROSSTALK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And if the
gas prices aren't killing you,
there's no reason to go into
an electric.
SONARI GLINTON: Yes.
And, right now, to be
clear, there are a lot of
hurdles for electric cars.
And, mainly, it's the battery.
It's not necessarily figuring
out how to move the car.
It's getting a lighter,
cheaper battery is what's
at the crux of this.
So, the auto industry knows that
that's where it's going, right?
But Wall Street and customers
say, well, we like those F-150s,
we like those Chevy Silverados
and those Dodge Rams, and
we're buying a lot of them.
And they're hugely, hugely
profitable, while electric car
profits are, A, they're about
3.5 -- the volume
of electric cars...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A tiny
sliver of the market.
SONARI GLINTON: Tiny,
like less than 4 percent.
And it's been stagnant
for a few years because
of those gas prices.
So, there's a lot of things.
And, for the most part, in
many places in the country --
I live in California, where
there are many, many charging
stations and there's rebates
and things like that that
you can get.
But if you're in the middle
of the country, the word
may not have gotten to you.
You know, there are
so many hurdles.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
incentives just aren't there.
SONARI GLINTON: The
incentives aren't there.
And we haven't educated the
consumer about the difference.
If you -- when people get into
electric cars, they love them.
When they use them in their
lives, they love them.
But you look at the marketing
and you look at the car
companies, and your Super Bowl
half-time commercial isn't
necessarily, you know,
the latest, lightest,
most fuel-sipping
vehicle.
No, it's the big trucks
and those things.
And, right now, that's
important in the short term.
But every carmaker
understands that
electrification and autonomy
are definitely the future.
And they're not the future
like 30 years from now.
They're the future
really, really soon.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So
there are no Kodaks among
the car manufacturers.
They get that electric is
the future, but they're still
making a lot of money off big,
heavy trucks.
And is there an
incompatibility there?
Can you make electric cars
and design and develop and
push them out at the same time
that you're making big,
heavy, gas-guzzling trucks?
SONARI GLINTON: Well, you can
make the argument that companies
like Ford or Chevy are already
doing that.
Chevy has the Volt, which
does what the Tesla Model
3 says it's going to do.
It goes over 200
miles per charge.
It's under $40,000, which
is within range of the
average American consumer.
And then they build --
some months, the Silverado
is really, really a
gangbuster for that company.
But when we talk to executives,
you hear the pressure to keep
those trucks going, to pump
out those F-150 profits.
You know, studies show that,
for Ford, the F-150 is as much
as 90 percent sometimes of
profitability.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Wow.
SONARI GLINTON: So, you
look at the F-150...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's a
hard thing to argue against.
SONARI GLINTON: Hard
to argue against.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As I
mentioned, Tesla is about
to roll out this Model
3, which, obviously,
the big question for them is
that they have been selling a
very small number of very pricey
cars.
And now they want to sell a
lot of these cheaper cars to
appeal to a bigger audience.
What's the big
challenge for Tesla?
SONARI GLINTON: All the bets.
For Tesla, it's a bet inside
of a bet inside of a bet.
They're betting that more people
are going to buy electric cars.
They're betting on the battery
technology, which Tesla has
one of the biggest factories
in the world making batteries.
They also bet on how they're
going to change the way people
-- how they sell the cars.
I mean, you look all across
the board when it comes to
Tesla, there's this huge bet.
Right now, they make
4,400 cars a month or so.
And they're looking to
sell 500,000 Model 3's.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
It's a huge scale-up.
SONARI GLINTON: And, at the
end of the month, Tesla says
it is going to deliver 30 cars
to the buyers, and then
1,900, you know, later on.
The key is, how long are those
customers going to wait for that
car, and how long is it going
to take to get there, and they
are going to be able to scale
up, and can they keep that
quality that they were known for
when they were selling 4,400?
I don't know what the answer
to those things are, but I do
know that is going to be really
hard.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: NPR's Sonari
Glinton, thanks so much.
SONARI GLINTON:
Always a pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally
tonight: an inside look at the
relationship and the political
partnership between President
Trump and his controversial
adviser Steve Bannon.
In Joshua Green's new book,
"Devil's Bargain: Steve Bannon,
Donald Trump, and the Storming
of the Presidency," he examines
how Bannon became a prominent
nationalist conservative
voice that helped create
one of the biggest upsets
in American politics.
Green is also a senior national
correspondent for Bloomberg
Businessweek, and he joins me
now.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
JOSHUA GREEN, Author, "Devil's
Bargain: Steve Bannon, Donald
Trump, and the Storming of
the Presidency": Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Josh
Green, you start the book
out saying Donald Trump
wouldn't be president
if it weren't for Steve Bannon.
In a nutshell, who
is Steve Bannon?
JOSHUA GREEN: Bannon is
a guy who is very much an
outsider like Donald Trump is.
And although he doesn't come
from money -- he was raised in
a blue-collar Navy family in
Richmond, Virginia -- he has
the same basic outlook toward
life and toward elites that
Donald Trump developed.
Bannon has a very
unusual background.
He joined the Navy.
He went from the Navy to
Harvard Business School.
He talked his way into a
job with Goldman Sachs as an
investment banker in the 1980s,
and moved from there to
Hollywood film financing,
and eventually became a
conservative documentarian,
met the late conservative
provocateur Andrew
Breitbart, and wound up
in charge of Breitbart
News, the right-wing news site.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what
brings these two men together?
Are they the ideological,
philosophically similar
people some might think?
What is the magic that
brings them together?
JOSHUA GREEN: I think the magic
that brings them together is
that they have the same basic
political outlook.
If you look at Trump and what
he said about politics going
all the way back to the 1980s,
there have been several
clear populist themes.
He is against free trade.
He thinks the U.S. is
getting taken advantage
of by foreign governments.
Bannon's populism is
very much the same, but
he adds the element of
immigration, hostility
to immigrants, both
legal and illegal.
And when Bannon met Trump in
2011 and began tutoring him
on politics, that was the idea
that he really put forward.
And if you look at the
politician Donald Trump
became, it's very much
a reflection of Steve
Bannon's politics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is this -- so,
is this something that's driven
by being against outsiders?
JOSHUA GREEN: It really is.
It's driven by the idea that
the country is in decline and
needs to fundamentally return
to an earlier time, when people
like Steve Bannon were at the
heart of the American economy
and American story, so the
1950s, when you had a strong
manufacturing base, when there
were -- it was clear, the
forces of good and evil in the
world, communism vs. democracy.
Both Trump and Bannon don't
like the rise of the younger,
multiethnic generations of
Americans that the Obama
coalition reflected,
and are doing everything
they can to fight
against it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, speaking
of that, what we have read
about Steve Bannon, Breitbart,
elements of racism, the
so-called alt-right movement,
even anti-Semitism, how much of
that is a strain here?
JOSHUA GREEN: It's a big strain.
And one of the effects that
Bannon had on politics was to
open up a kind of sluice gate
of people who existed really
only on the fringes of American
and far-right talk radio and on
Internet boards and try and
bring them into the political
conversation, the mainstream
political conversation,
by giving them a voice on
places like Breitbart News.
And what Bannon thought he
was doing was marshaling
these hidden political
forces to go up against
not Democrats, but the
establishment Republican
leaders, people like
Mitch McConnell, Paul
Ryan and, before him,
House Speaker John Boehner,
who was Bannon's original
target and was forced
to resign in 2015, in
part because of the
energies that Bannon and
Breitbart News unleashed
in Washington politics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK,
on just as straight a
measurement as you can, how
successful has Steve Bannon
been in getting his ideas
across in this administration?
JOSHUA GREEN: Well, it
would be hard to argue
that Bannon hasn't been
shockingly successful
overall.
If you go back three years --
and I tell this story in the
book -- Steve Bannon was very
closely allied with Jeff
Sessions, who, at the time, was
the populist Republican senator
from Alabama.
And Bannon tried to talk
Sessions into running for
president, not because
he thought he could
win, but because he
thought Sessions could
elevate the issues of
immigration and antipathy
to free trade to the top
of the Republican agenda.
And Sessions ultimately
decided not to do that.
But by linking up with Donald
Trump, Bannon was able to not
only get that on top of the
Republican agenda, but make
it all the way into the White
House and have real power to
enact some of these policies,
in a way that he never did
as a conservative publisher.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is Bannon
involved in the Russian probe?
JOSHUA GREEN: So far, he seems
not to be directly implicated.
I know he hasn't hired
a lawyer, as many people
in the Trump family and
the Trump administration
have to defend them against
potential investigation.
So, as far as we know,
Bannon is not yet implicated
in the Russia scandal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you have
reported, I know, in, I guess,
language that we can't use here,
that Bannon is interested
in smearing Robert
Mueller as much as he can.
JOSHUA GREEN: Well, if you look
at what Steve Bannon really
does for Donald Trump, going
all the way back to
the beginning of their
relationship, it isn't
that he's a Machiavellian
figure, as he's been portrayed.
It's that Steve Bannon is the
guy who goes out and attacks
Trump's critics and his enemies,
whether that's someone like
Megyn Kelly at FOX News, or the
mainstream media after Trump's
"Access Hollywood" tape
was released on the
eve of the debates.
Right now, Trump feels
like he needs someone
aggressively defending
him in the Russia probe.
And he wasn't happy with the
way that his own White House
spokespeople were doing the
job.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If you look at
the polls right now, in -- I
guess, in large part, Donald
Trump seems to be holding
on to his base, but there is
some evidence of slippage.
And you have got, what,
40 percent of Americans
with a strong opposition
to Donald Trump.
If it continues this way, does
Steve Bannon stay where he is?
JOSHUA GREEN: I think it does,
because Bannon and Trump both
seem to believe that it is
absolutely vital to keep
Trump's base angry and
riled up and active.
And there is some pretty
interesting polling data to
indicate that that's working.
The Washington Post/ABC had a
poll that came out this week
saying that only 9 percent of
Republicans thought that
the Russia collusion
posed any sort of problem.
And, to me, that's an
indication that Bannon's
methods are working.
And while he hasn't gotten
Trump anywhere near a majority
of popular support, he has
managed to maintain that
critical 40 percent base that
Trump is going to rely on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Josh Green,
nobody else has gotten this
deep a look at Steve Bannon.
So, thank you very much.
"Devil's Bargain" is the book,
"Steve Bannon, Donald Trump, and
the Storming of the Presidency."
Thank you very much.
JOSHUA GREEN: Thanks
so much for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And online right
now: It took more than 2,500
cardboard tubes to build the
latest exhibit at the
National Building Museum
here in Washington.
Now you can see what's the
buzz, what is behind the buzz.
Go inside the hive with
our latest stories on
Instagram and Snapchat.
You can follow us at
"NewsHour" on Instagram and
at PBS News on Snapchat.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.